// If I gave you this file, I probably want you to help me fill it in. It's very important that you follow the format exactly, or else my 
// compilation program will get mad and everything will break. You have to have exactly one empty line between each piece's paragraph, then 
// a name of an image (it can be pretty much anything; somebody just needs to go get a picture, put it in the folder, and then rename it properly, 
// including changing the extension in this file to reflect the picture that you found.) and then information. Any line breaks you put in 
// this file will be reflected on the website. When you're done with a piece, put an empty line, and start over. Just one empty 
// line between each image, that's really important. You can also just use the ones I've already done as guides, if you want.
// Also, note that, if you want to split this up into 2 sets (usually pre-midterm and post-midterm), you can do that by putting a line of
// = in the file where you want to break it. There need be no line break on either side of the line of =, just start with another picture. 
chauvet.jpg
Chauvet Caves
Cave Paintings
By Unknown Prehistoric Man
Roughly 30,000 years ago. 
In the Ardeche Region of France
We really don't know hardly anything about it. It might have been a worship place or something like that. And it's the oldest known human art around, that too. 

willendorf.jpg
Venus of Willendorf
Limestone Sculpture
Unknown Artist
Paleolithic Art, from 28,000-25,000 BC
Found near Krems, Austria
Now in Naturhistorisches Museum, Vienna. 
Probably a symbol of Fertility, as it's childbearing features are very emphasized. 

laussel.jpg
Venus of Laussel
Limestone bas relief
Unknown Artist
Paleolithic Art, from about 25,000 BC
Found in Dordogne Region of France
Probably a symbol for a fertility goddess or similar. 

brassempouy.png
Venus of Brassempouy
Mammoth Ivory Sculpture
Unknown Artist
Paleolithic art, from 26,000 to 24,000 BC
Found in La Grotte du Pape, France
Unclear use; probably for some kind of ceremonial or religious use. 

pyramid.jpg
Pyramids of Giza
Brick Building
Unknown Architect - Built by slaves
Egyptian Art
In the Necropolis, bordering El Giza, Egypt
Used as a tomb for a Pharaoh

rahotep.png
Funerary Statues of Rahotep and his wife, Nophret
Painted Limestone sculptures; eyes made of crystalline quartz and fused quartz
Unknown Artist
Egyptian Funerary Art from ~2,600 BC
Found in Giza, now in Cairo Museum
Funerary Statues for Rahotep and his Wife

seated.jpg
Seated Pharaoh
She didn't give us a material
Unknown Artist
Egyptian Funerary Art
10 Feet tall
4,000 years old
In Berlin, Germany; found in Egypt
Funerary Statue 

menkaure.jpg
Menkaure, the Last Great Pyramid Builder
Made from slate
From left to right, Hathor (a goddess), King Menkaure, and a servant. 
Egyptian Art - 2,680-2,565 BC
In Egyptian Antiquity Museum, Cairo

memnon.png
Younger Memnon Colossal Figure of Ramesses II 
Granite
Egyptian Art
8 feet 11 inches high; 7.25 tons
From about 1270 BC
Used to be next to the doorway of the Ramesseum, but now in British Museum, London

reserve.jpg
Reserved Heads
Limestone or mud from the banks of the Nile
First found in Dashar; most found in Giza
Built in Royal Workshops
Made between 2,551-2,469 BC
They were made for non-royals for after they died, so that their soul might go somewhere if something should happen to their body. 

kheti.png
Tomb of Kheti
Egyptian Paintings
Beni Hasan necropolis

hesire.jpg
Relief of Hesire from a wooden door in his tomb
Low relief
In Cairo Museum
Egyptian
From about 2,700 BC

isis.png
Isis and Ramses III
Egyptian painted relief
Ramses is being embraced by a goddess
Valley of the Queens in the West Bank at Luxor, Egypt

hatshemsut.png
Temple to Hatshemsut
Painting
In Dayr al-Bahiri, Egypt.
1458 BC
Egyptian
Shows her trade expedition to Punt

osiris.jpg
The Dead before Osiris
Painting in Book of the Dead
1550 BC
Egyptian
This book was an ancient Egyptian's guide to the afterlife.

sounion.png
Sounion Kouros
By Polymedes of Argos
Found in Delphi
Marble from Naxos
600 BC
Greek Sculpture
Now in Delphi Museum, Greece
You can see a lot of Egyptian influence in this. 

charioteer.jpg
Charioteer of Delphi
Found in Delphi
Greek Sculpture from bronze
From about 478 BC
In Delphi Archaeological Museum, Greece
This used to be part of a bigger sculpture with a horse and a chariot. That's why his legs are so long, so he could stand behind the chariot. The eyes were colored stones and had some gold in them, so that they looked more lifelike. This shows the beginnings of naturalism. 

warrior.jpg
Greek Warrior
Greek Sculpture in Bronze
From 5th century BC
2 meters high
Found off the coast of Riace, Italy
Now in the National Museum, Reggio di Calabria, Italy

discobolos.jpg
Discobolos, or Disk Thrower
Made by Myron
Roman Marble copy of Greek Bronze statue. 
~ 450 BC
In Glytothek Museum, Munich
This shows a lot of motion, unlike Egyptian sculpture, but does show the torso straight on but the feet sideways, from their most recognizable angles, like Egyptian paintings. 

hercules.jpg
Hercules Carrying the Heavens
From temple of Zeus, Olympia
~460 BC
Now in Olympia Museum, Greece
Marble Relief
This is a very simple relief, and you can see some Egyptian influence in it.

leavetaking.jpg
Warrior's Leave Taking
Greek Vase in Red-figured Style
Made by Euthymides
~500 BC
Now in Antiquarium, Munich
Shows departure from Egyptian style, as the feet aren't sideways, for example.

achilles.jpg
Achilles and Ajax playing at Draughts
Black figured style Greek vase
By Exekias
~540 BC
Now in Vatican Museum, Italy

parthenon.jpg
The Parthenon
Doric Style Temple
Built around 450 BC
Athens, Greece
It was a temple to Athena
This was a fine example of Greek architecture and the Doric order. It is surrounded by Doric columns. 
228 x 101.4 feet
Columns are 6.2 feet in diameter and 34.1 feet tall

hephaestus.jpg
Marble
Greek Temple, Doric Style
449-415 BC
Near the Parthenon

crypt.jpg
Crypt in Washington, DC
American example of Doric columns
Designed by William Thornton
Finished in 1827

triomphe.jpg
Arch de Triomphe du Carrousel
Paris
1806-1808
Example of Corinthian columns

colosseum.jpg
The Colosseum
Rome
Stone, originally covered with marble
4 stories high
188 x 156 meters
There used to be statues in every arch of it, but now they're gone.

trajan.bmp
Forum of Trajan
112 AD
Rome

pillar.jpg
Pillar of Trajan
112 AD
by Master of Trajan's Exploits
100 feet tall
Now has a statue of St. Peter on top, but used to be Trajan
Used to house Trajan's ashes
Relief showing Trajan's conquest of Dacia

dionysos.jpg
Triumph of Dionysos and the Seasons
Marble
260-170 AD
34 inches high
Roman Funerary Art
Now in Metropolitan Museum of Art
Notice that the Seasons are usually women, but here they are youth. 
40 human and animal carvings in high relief. 
Installed in Badminton House, Gloustershire, England in 1733

bust_man.jpg
Marble bust of a man
Mid first century
Marble
14 3/8 inches high
Metropolitan Museum of Art, NYC
He doesn't look like they tried to make him look better than he actually looked. His old wrinklyness shows how much he gave to the empire, so it was appealing to the Romans. 

vespasian.jpg
Emperor Vespasian
Reigned 69-79 AD
Plaster cast after the original in the Louvre
Pushkin Museum, Moscow, Russia

old.jpg
Unknown Head of Old Roman
~60 AD
Marble
Glytothek Museum, Munich

oldman.jpg
Marble Bust of an Old Man
Unknown Date
Vatican Museum, Italy

aurelius.jpg
Bust of Young Marcus Aurelius
Marble
~161-180 AD
Capitoline Museum, Rome
Notice the detail in his hair

antonius.jpg
Antonius Pius, adoptive father of Marcus Aurelius
Marble
Reigned 138-161 AD
Glytothek Museum, Germany
From about 150 AD
Look at the furrows around his brow and the crow's feet around his eyes. 

laocoon.jpg
Laocoon and his Sons
By Atandoros, Hagesandros, and Polydoros of Rhodes
Early first century AD
Marble
7 feet, 10.5 inches high
Vatican Museum
Used to be in Titus' Palace
Pliny the Elder wrote about it in his <em>Natural History</em>. He really seemed to like it. 
=============================================================================================
romanPainting.png
Villa of Livia Drusilla
Garden Frescos
In a decorated, windowless basement 15 km north of Rome. 
Discovered in 1863 in Prima Porta
Runs along all 4 walls and might have been used as a summer room. 
Shows strong knowledge of plants, but also evergreen garder, 
underlining artificial character of this style of painting. 

mattGermany.jpg
St. Matthew
From Coronation of Gospels (Gospel book of Charlemagne)
Found in Aachen, Germany
Tempura on Vellum
Now in Kunsthistorisches Museum, Vienna

mattFrance.jpg
St. Matthew
From Folio 18 verso of Ebbo Gospels
(Verso means is the left-hand page when the book is open)
From Rheims, France
From 816-835
Ink and tempera on vellum.
In Epernay, France, in the municipal library. 

dragon.jpg
Dragon head-post
Found at Osberg, Norway in a ship burial
From about 825
Wood
5 inches high
Oslo, University Museum

enthroned.jpg
Christ Enthroned
From the Book of Kells
Trinity College Libray, Dublin, Ireland
From about 800 AD

kellsDragon.gif
Book of Kells
Trinity College
Dublin, Ireland
ca. 800 AD
Probably most famous example of illuminated manuscript

kellsDragon2.jpg
Book of Kells
Trinity College
Dublin, Ireland
ca. 800 AD
Illuminated manuscript, ink on vellum

celticCross.jpg
Celtic Cross from Book of Kells
Illuminated manuscript on vellum with ink
Trinity College
Dublin, Ireland
ca. 800 AD
It is estimated that 800 calves were used to make this book. 

bayeux.jpg
Bayeux Tapestry
ca. 1092
A picture-chronicle of the Battle of Hastings
William, Duke of Normandy, defeated Harold of Wessex (fellow in the middle
with the hawk) in 1066.
Made for Odo, Bishop of Bayeux, brother-in-law to William
19.5 inches high, 231 feet long
The Latin on this part says "And his [Harold's] soldiers went by horse to Bos"
There's lots of information in the notes about this; 
You'll probably want to know it. 
See <a href="http://www.evernote.com/l/AAU9h6d7RvhGZ4oUAS3R3i4auOihIox2mWo/" target="_blank">my notes</a> if you don't have your own. 

bayeux2.jpg
King Edward sends Harold on a mission to Normandy
ca. 1092 AD
Bayeux, France
Another picture from Bayeux Tapestry
On the throne is Edward the Confessor, King of England
Next to him is Harold, Earl of Wessex

bayeux3.jpg
Harold took an oath to Duke William
Latin: "Here, William comes to Bagias; where Harold makes an oath to 
leader William."
From Bayeux Tapestry
ca. 1092

bayeux4.jpg
King Edward addresses his faithful ones
On the right, it says that they're giving Harold the crown of a king. 

bayeux5.gif
Harold is Crowned King
"Here Harold sits back as king of the English"

bayeux6.gif
Normans Crossing the English Channel

bayeux7.gif
Normans foraging for food in England

bayeux8.gif
William and Odo dining
There is a bunch of stuff on the left, they are making the food
and the priest is blessing it, and on the right, it says they're about
to destroy a castle, I think, but she didn't talk about that, so don't worry about it. 

bayeux9.gif
Civilian Casualties
On the far left, I've got no idea what's going on. Then, someone's telling William
about Harold, presumably about his death. Then a house is getting burned, and that's all you
have to know about this. 

bayeux10.jpg
The Battle is Joined
"Here English and French fall at the same time."

bayeux11.gif
Death of Harold of Wessex, King of England
The Saxons are defeated by the Normans
"Here, Harold was killed"

towerLondon.jpg
The Tower of London
Built in 1078 of stone 
By William the Conqueror
London, England

barton.jpg
Earls Barton "Norton" Church
England

romney.jpg
New Romney Church Tower
England

saintDenis.JPG
Abbey Church of St. Denis
Large Medieval Abbey Church in a suburb north of Paris
Used to be a Gallo-Roman cemetery
About 475 AD St. Genevieve established a church on this site. It was replaced in the 7th century by a much grander building on orders from Dagobert I, king of Franks

chartres.jpg
Notre Dame of Chartres
Not Notre Dame of Paris; beware. 
1140-1260
This is the West Facade, the only survivor of Romanesque Cathedral
Chartres, France

notreDame.jpg
Cathedral of Notre Dame
Example of Gothic Architecture
1163-1250 AD
Paris, France
Ms. Broer took a picture of it in 2011 and showed it to us. It is very similar the picture I have here, from the same angle,
but from across the Seine. So if you see that, maybe you can get some extra points and tell her the year she took it. 

pazzi.jpg
Pazzi Chapel
By Brunelleschi
Florence, Italy
Begun in 1433

dome.jpg
Dome of Florence Cathedral
By Brunelleschi
Florence

trinity.jpg
Holy Trinity
Masaccio (Tommaso di Ser Giovanni di Simone, but you don't have to worry about that.)
1427
677 x 317 cm
In Santa Maria Novella Church, Florence, Italy
It's placed right opposite the entrance, so it looks like it's actually a real space. 
It shows God, the Holy Spirit, in the form of a dove (it looks like God's collar, but it's a dove), and Jesus, the three persons of God. There's also Mary and St. John. Jesus looks really realistic. There's also a sarcophagus and a skeleton that reminds the viewer that they will, someday, die, and they better damn well remember it.

taxCollector.jpg
The Tribute Money
Masaccio
In the Brancacci Chapel, Florence, Italy

stGeorge.jpg
Saint George
1417
By Donatello
Marble
82.25 inches high
Museo Nazionale del Bargello, Florence, Italy

davidDonatello.jpg
David
By Donatello
Bronze
Centerpiece of the first courtyard in Palazzo Madici
1430-1460
Bargello Museum in Florence, Italy
Excellent Example of contrapposto
First freestanding nude sculpture since antiquity. The medieval people thought that the soul was good and the body was evil, so they didn't make the body as much. It is also in contrapposto, which is interesting. That's a page straight out of Greek antiquity. It's also hollow and bronze, which was very classical. David beat Goliath as the underdog with God's help, and Florentines identified with that because they too beat the Duke of Milan, ostensibly with God's help. So David symbolizes Florence, in a way. The Medici also thought that they were symbolized by David. 

judges.jpg
The Righteous Judges and the Knights of Christ
Jan Van Eyck
Wings from Ghent altar
Completed 1432
Cathedral St. Bavo in Ghent, Belgium

arnolfini.jpg
The Betrothal of Arnolfini, or Portrait of Giovanni Arnolfini and His Wife 
(It has two names because there isn't clarity as to whether it is, in fact, depicting a marriage.)
Jan Van Eyck
Tempura and oil on wood
1434
National Gallery, London
Look at the mirror and you can see the whole painting from behind, including two more people in front of the couple. Van Eyck's name is also written above the mirror. 
There is also a lot of detail in the dog, which is a symbol of luxury because they were expensive to keep. The case could be made, in fact, that the painting is about the guy's wealth. There's a really ridiculous amount of detail in this painting, like the scenes from the passion of Christ in the edge of the mirror. The dog is also interesting because it symbolizes fidelity in the marriage. There are also oranges which symbolize wealth because they were really expensive. They also don't have shoes on, which might imply that something sacred was going on, maybe their wedding. There is also a lot of attention to light and shadows, which is interesting. Van Eyck was very interested in shadows and not as interested in getting the people to look exactly right, the opposite of the Italian Renaissance. 
Also, the woman isn't pregnant; she's just holding up her dress. 

venus.jpg
The Birth of Venus
1483
Sandro Botticelli
Tempura on canvas
172.5 cm x 278.5 cm
Painted for the Villa of Lorenzo di Pierfrancesco di Medici
Uffizzi Museum
Florence, Italy
See that they are all floating in the air. 
She's just about to be covered by this lady on the right. 
Some people think that this might be about reaching divine beauty by way of physical beauty. 

unicorn.jpg
La Dame a La Licorne
(The Lady and the Unicorn)
Wool and silk tapestry 
ca. 500
Aqcquired by the Musee Cluny from the Chateau Boussac in 1882
Still in Musee Cluny in Paris
Each of 6 tapestries represents one of 5 senses, with the 6th inscribed with "A mon seul desir," or "My only desire," in which temporal desires have been renounced. 